[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As we look at the world, at
society's impact on the planet,
many ideas abound regarding
what kind of species cannot seem
to help but destroy
its own habitat.
Is this just human behavior,
or is humanity sick?
According to interpretations
of cave and rock art,
shamanism begin as early as
humanity's great leap forward
in human consciousness, almost
as if the shamanic impulse
emerged because the planet knew
that the spiritual practices
and listening to
the Earth would be
needed to balance the behavior
of future generations.
The use of psychedelic
plants have
been associated with
shamanism since the beginning,
and many believe that the
shamanic use of psychedelics
could be one key to creating
a sustainable future,
not simply by living in
the past but by bringing
the wisdom of the past
with us and building
a psychedelic friendly
society and a holistic world,
one where the face of religion,
pharmacology, architecture,
and city planning are in
line with the morality
and conscience that the plant
sacraments tend to evoke.
But over the centuries,
modern society
has slowly replaced the
practice of shamanism
and shunned the use
of psychedelic plants.
So what are the consequences
of a species divorcing itself
from its true nature
and from its past?
>> I think one of the problems
that we face as humans today is
that we've lost touch
with human nature.
We've become so enculturated,
socialized, technolized
that we no longer recognize
what's really truly
important to human beings.
And what I've hoped to be
able to do through my work
is to help people
understand that there's
something about spirituality
that's part of human nature,
that humans evolved through
spiritual practices.
The supernatural is a natural
part of human experience
and it's been a very important
part of human evolution.
Shamanism is part
of our human nature.
We need to engage in
shamanic practices
in order to give expression to
aspects of our human nature.
And I think that there
is increasing evidence
that part of our human
nature was shaped
by these environmental
influences
that we call psychedelics, that
in essence are neurotransmitter
systems were selected for our
ancestor species that were best
capable of taking
these substances
and using them constructively.
>> In several
shamanic traditions,
as well as modern
spiritual disciplines,
the human organism is seen
as a microcosm of the planet,
and one integral way of
influencing the planet is
by living differently
from within.
One of the biggest shifts that
can occur within a human body
is through neurochemical and
hormonal transformations.
Neurotransmitters are
the chemical messengers
of the nervous system.
They signal biological processes
to initiate inside the body.
So why is it that psychedelic
plants mimic the messenger
molecules to our
neurotransmitter systems?
There are several
forms of plant mimicry
that we currently know of.
Some weeds mimic
the scent of flowers
and attract animals
for pollination.
A few of them mimic the
look of domesticated plants.
Some mimic the look of
insects and still others
mimic the leaf structure
of neighboring plants.
These are theorized to
be survival mechanisms
for those particular
plant species.
However, psychedelic and
psychoactive fungi, leaves,
seeds, flowers, roots, bark,
and even animal species
mimic neurotransmitter molecules
that affect the way we think,
feel, and even construct
our belief systems.
>> Nature communicates in
chemical signatures through
the species.
And the plant
entheogens, which are
secreted by nature,
when we take them,
they plug into our
consciousness and our, you know,
where-- and they
expand our awareness.
And it's like Gaia
is communicating
through these chemical
messengers in the same way
that she mediates other species
with chemicals in nature.
These plant sacraments
and the entheogens
may be interspecies
messengers for us.
>> If nature mediates a species
through chemical messengers,
it stands to reason that
there is a mechanism meant
for humanity as well.
But is it possible that human
consciousness has been limited
and shut off to the full
spectrum of nature around us?
If the purpose of
psychedelic plants
is to cause humanity
to wake up, how
does this truly differ
from the spiritual messages
and religions?
Why are experts now
claiming that these plants
can offer genuine insights
into the nature of our reality?
>> That's the beautiful
thing about psychedelics.
It's a thing that happens
on a personal level.
You can use your own
mind to interpret
it, make of it what you will.
So this is not encouraged
in our society.
What's encouraged in
society through most
of our institutions-- religion,
academia, all of those things,
social media, all of this--
we are encouraged to give up our
ability to think for ourselves.
>> And that's the big difference
is religion is something
you're told and taught.
Psychedelics is a direct
experience that you have,
and so it brings an element
in that is more real than what
you've been told.
Your own experiences
is much more real.
Psychedelics definitely can
break long-held patterns,
and beliefs systems are
nothing but patterns.
And so I think it's a
re-envisioning, a renovation
of these world religions, the
reintroduction of the sacrament
that we need at this time.
>> The shamanic perspective
of the sacrament differs from
culture to culture, but from
a historical perspective,
psychedelic plant sacraments
for religious purposes have been
used for tens of
thousands of years.
Since there are so many
psychedelic plant species that
mimic the same
neurotransmitters,
can this still be considered
a survival mechanism
of these particular plants
or is the survival mechanism
more broadly associated with
human behavior's effects
on the Earth at large?
>> I think that it's really
important to mention that with
all this psychedelic insight
that people are gaining with
all of the mystical experiences,
with all the skills that are
being improved, and all these
different things that come out
of it, it's most important
to remember that ecological
awareness is probably first and
foremost what the psychedelics
are trying to impart on us.
>> Is it possible that just
like plant mimicry used
by individual plant species
for their own survival that
psychedelic plants anticipated
the rapid growth of the human
neocortex and the complicated
behavior that this evolutionary
leap would cause
for this planet?
And if so, how exactly
are psychedelics
changing humanity's
relationship with nature?
>> One of the interesting things
that has emerged out of the use
of psychedelics is that many of
the people who have these kinds
of experiences develop a very
different perception of nature.
Here in the Western
world, we're told
that it's just a bunch
of physical stuff,
it's just material world.
But when you take the
psychedelics and all
of these filters
are stripped away
and we start to have this more
direct perception of nature,
nature appears alive.
It's dynamic, it's
animated and the trees move
and the trees emit
energy and plants move
and they have messages for us.
And of course, what
we see in the shamanic
cultures is the continued
use of these kinds
of substances in healing.
So we know that there's a
variety of important influences
that come in terms of human
social bonding, altruism,
concern for others.
I think it's very fair to
say that in important ways,
psychedelics influenced human
evolution for the better.
>> The major problem in the
world now is alienation.
We are disconnected
from our own bodies,
we are disconnected
from each other,
from nature, we
are disconnected from the
cosmos, from the divine.
So we need spirituality
that you can get only
from personal experience.
>> If these specific plants
provide a way for humanity
to reestablish our connection
with the natural world,
as well as supernatural realms,
what is the next step that
our modern society needs to take
in order to establish a healthy
and lasting relationship
with the planet?
>> A medicine-friendly
society I think would be very,
very beneficial.
I think a medicine-friendly
society is what we need.
I think the fact that we
have banned these medicines
and replaced them
with pharmaceuticals
is what has led to
so many problems.
I think if we were taught
these traditions early
and we were allowed to
use these medicines,
we would not have this
dysfunctional society.
We wouldn't have this
massive amount of sickness.
These aren't drugs,
they're medicines
like any other
medicines that you
get from any other plant
that can heal yourself
in different ways.
Only these can heal you
in psychological ways
and spiritual ways.
People that have gone through
30, 40 years of psychotherapy
can go and drink ayahuasca
once and get more benefit
than 30 or 40 years
of psychotherapy.
>> As these plants seem to bring
the users awareness directly
into the heart of the issue,
to face it head on, the current
drugs on the market
within psychiatry--
while useful and
effective on some levels--
only dull or reduce
the symptoms,
which brings the patient even
farther away from actively
engaging with the root of what
they're attempting to resolve.
>> Psychiatry as a field
of medicine is really--
and even psychiatrists in
the field will tell you,
I can't do anything, the
drugs are not that good,
we don't have anything new.
And so the psychedelics come
in and they sort of just blow
that all up.
I think it will sort of
resurrect psychiatry.
>> Were it to be approved --and
that occur anytime from two
to 10 years--
were it to be approved, I
would envision it initially
to be approved under very
restricted conditions, where
psilocybin perhaps would be held
by a single central pharmacy
and would be dispensed to
specialized therapeutic centers
with people who are trained
in psychedelic psychotherapy.
>> I think they will have
their therapeutic uses,
but I think the idea to just
have places where you can go
and have the experience in
a safe environment and focus
on the experience with
people there who can help you
facilitate it, whether
you call them shamans
or psychotherapists or
some combination of that,
it doesn't really matter.
The point is they are
facilitators more than anything
else, but they enable you
to have a rich experience.
>> These seemingly new
approaches to psychiatry
and pharmacology are actually
throwbacks to a more ancestral
method of mental health.
In a historical context,
modern psychiatry and medicine
has taken over in
the blink of an eye
with brand new drugs, brand
new methods, and a form
of historical amnesia.
It is this conventional
mindset that
has caused for groups like
MAPS to increase awareness
of the potential
benefits of psychedelics
through the scientific method.
Many other groups are also
spreading this awareness,
but few of them are willing to
interface with federal agencies
in order to move this
research forward.
Founder of MAPS,
Rick Doblin, has
waded through the
laundry list of gripes
about the current
pharmaceutical paradigm
in order to increase
transparency,
circumvent conflicts
of interest, and more.
>> The key thing about the
Benefit Corporation is that
it's not about
maximizing profits,
it's about maximizing
social benefit.
The only investor in the
for-profit Benefit Corporation
is the nonprofit MAPS.
So that's our structure.
So we're going to be
focusing just on donations.
There is no private gain here.
It's all about trying
to really improve
the health of our society
and help us all survive.
Here's the psychedelic clinics
of the future, one day.
This is a beautiful one.
One day you'll go to
Google Maps and you'll
say, where is a psychedelic
clinic, and you'll get this.
>> With a new approach to
keeping future pharma ethical
and efficient, what might we
see for the future of medical
and therapeutic industries?
>> I think what you may see
not too far in the future is
something like spas or places
you can go and have these
experiences highly structured,
appropriately structured
to optimize people's
experiences.
>> I see a future where
they're fully integrated
into our society, or at least
in some societies of the world,
that there are psychedelic
facilitators that are
supporting people in big healing
and awakening experiences.
But I also see them being
used in scientific inquiry
and technical advancements,
advanced creative problem
solving, and that sort of thing.
So I like to see them as
being instrumental in moving
our future forward in
a positive direction.
>> Psychedelics in society
might change the nature of how
business interfaces
with the public,
not only through client
engagement and technical
approaches, but also might be
seen in the look and function
of architecture.
Even tribes that lived
embedded in the natural world
placed different values on
living and working spaces
that the modern world
rarely understands.
The Oneida Indian Nation
in upstate New York
even build their casinos
to flow with the landscape,
rather than squaring them off.
This is based on their
philosophy that boxed off
spaces cause energy to flow
improperly and even the mind
to operate unnaturally
within the visual aesthetic.
An observation that
some people make
after a psychedelic
experience is
how alien or industrial modern
urban sprawl tends to look.
Housing developments without
plant life around them
seem to stand out, rather than
integrate into the landscape.
If these plants are agents
of Mother Earth placed here
to enhance our
relationship with nature,
industry might lean in the
same direction and even
the cultural norms
that our youth commonly
grow up with might change
into something closer
to what our shamanic
ancestors used to employ.
>> One of the important uses
of psychedelics in shamanic
societies were to develop
you into an adult.
You went on a vision quest
and the plant substances were
supposed to enhance your ability
to encounter the spiritual
entities that were going
to guide you in your life.
So at 18, instead of saying,
yeah, I can go out and get
drunk, we'd have a retreat.
We'd send our 18-year-olds
off for a week or two
and they'd use psilocybin or LSD
or ayahuasca two or three, four
times.
They'd have a purpose
to try to figure out
how they want to sort
through their life, what
they want to do next.
And we'd go through
life this way.
When we'd reach major milestones
or major difficulties,
we'd return to these
substances and try
to find out what it is that
we can learn about ourselves,
our goals, our desires in order
to be happier about what we do.
I think there's also
important social implications.
I think it would be
really useful to take
the leaders of conflicting
societies and cultures
and make them spend a weekend
together doing ayahuasca
or psilocybin talking
to each other,
starting to see each
other's points of view.
>> The amount of ways that
our world might change due
to the adoption of psychedelics
into the fabric of society
seems to be all pervasive, as
these plants cover a wide range
of applications from religious
sacraments to psychotherapy
to rites of passage for our
youth and all the roadblocks
on the way to the final
moments of one's life.
The only thing slowing
our societal adoption
of these plants as
viable medicines
is the approval of their
scientific research.
If the cultural stigma and legal
restrictions were loosened,
what could these plants teach
us about who we are as a species
and what our place
is on this Earth?
>> Psychedelics represent unique
opportunities for modulating
and understanding the
nature of consciousness,
the nature of awareness, the
nature of perceptual process,
how we understand ourselves
and others within the world.
And so there's a lot
that we can do in terms
of scientific understanding.
So that needs to move forward,
and move forward aggressively,
because they're
uniquely powerful tools.
I actually sometimes feel when
I reflect back on the fact
that these compounds were
removed from the research
laboratory for
decades, literally
I feel kind of like
Rip Van Winkle,
awakening to the opportunity
now to reinvestigate
these compounds and the world.
The scientific
field has moved on.
I mean, we have all these
imaging methodologies,
we have much better
psychometric measures
for measuring subjective states,
we have different receptor
models for looking at
interactions of these compounds
and brain processes.
We understand spirituality and
some of these subtle states
of consciousness much better.
And all of these tools of
science now are available,
and now we have this very
powerful intervention.
So there are literally
thousands of different questions
to be addressed.
>> Entertaining thoughts of the
future are always loaded with
what ifs--
how far can the
envelope be pushed,
how safe is the approach,
how can external technology
liberate us from
internal illness,
and how do technologies
undermine our body and mind's
natural abilities?
In a psychedelic society,
the emphasis of life
likely wouldn't revolve purely
around the use of these plants,
but what new ideas for the
future they can conjure.
One highly debated topic
in the information age
is the future of mankind's
integration with technology
and where it may lead us.
As new discoveries of
neurophysiology come to light,
what advancements might
we see in the near future?
>> We may end up understanding
the brain mechanisms that
underlie some of these
alterations of moods,
attitudes, behavior,
consciousness that would
ultimately make psychedelic
drugs unnecessary.
So it could be that there will
be ways to stimulate brain, be
it electronically or
with lasers or whatever,
and manipulate history
and context to also induce
these kinds of states
of consciousness.
And then the future of
that is really unknown.
>> If psychedelic states could
be evoked by technologies
in any amount at any time,
could this reduce our capacity
to appreciate nature, not
just the flora and fauna,
but the nature of foraging
or growing psychedelic plants
or even the necessity
of ceremony?
If an otherworldly
experience were
possible at the
push of a button,
would this be counter-intuitive
to these plants speaking
messages of Mother
Earth to our species?
Another unknown for the future
of technology and psychedelia
is in regards to the DMT
synthesizing gene in humans.
We asked the author of "DMT:
The Spirit Molecule," Rick
Strassman, about
this possibility.
>> Well, there is an interplay
between genetic medicine
and the psychedelics.
And I think in
one case, it would
be with respect to
the psychedelics
that the body makes on its own.
And I think we're just
beginning to learn
about the genetic regulation
of DMT synthesis, which I
think will be very important--
what conditions turn it on,
what turn it off, are there
variants, are there
other influences which
would modify the
synthesis of endogenous
or naturally occurring DMT?
For example, if you
get an infection,
certain genes get turned
on to make antibodies
and activate the
T-cells and whatnot.
So that's called the
genetic regulation
of antibodies or antibody
synthesis at the gene level.
>> Causing the human organism
to produce different amounts
of DMT naturally within
the body sounds intriguing,
but does the knowledge and
technology exist to be able
to alter our genetics to
self-produce psychedelic
compounds in the body?
>> There is a technology
called CRISPR,
which is kind of going
down into the gene level.
They've characterized
the gene that
makes the enzymes that are
responsible for the formation
of DMT.
You could engineer a
rodent, let's say, to not
have any DMT synthesized.
Or you can modify
a rodent, perhaps--
it's not known yet--
to overproduce DMT.
So, if that's established to
be feasible in lower animals,
I think as we advance in
our understanding of how
to insert genes
into higher species,
there's going to be
an interest in that.
>> Could using technology such
as CRISPR-Cas9 genetically
alter the natural DMT
synthesizing gene already
present in our bodies?
Would it be possible
to control the amounts
of endogenous or
self-produced DMT in the body?
As many technologies are
becoming consumer-friendly
and price and the
knowledge and skill
sets to perform these medical
miracles are becoming more
accessible through
information sharing,
what would happen if our
neighbors and community members
began engineering themselves
to bring about the DMT state
on demand?
One of the greatest
divides happening
in the field of
psychedelica is how
to get in touch with that space.
Many psychonauts, such
as Terence McKenna,
spoke about the debate of
whether we should be training
ourselves through meditation
and movement practices
to achieve the
same state as when
taking a psychedelic substance.
He asked why one has to
spend years in meditation,
isolated in the
mountains, before catching
a glimpse of the same experience
that a plant can give anyone
within one hour of
ingestion, while others
believe that avoiding the inner
path to those expanded states
and always relying
on external sources
is the very essence of
why we are a species that
is dependent upon
externalities in order to feel
validated and meaningful.
The concern seems to be growing.
New advancements of psychedelic
substances and technology
are emerging at an
unbelievable rate.
Well after the DMT
trials that Dr.
Rick Strassman conducted in
the early to mid-'90s, a new
evolution of psychedelic
theory emerged.
If the DMT trip is so
short yet gives so many
different insights than
do other psychedelics,
such as superintelligent
entities and a predictable type
of landscape, then
extending the experience
is the next frontier.
Neurobiologist Andrew
Gallimore began
seeing how possible this
process is and began
developing the formula
and protocol in order
to establish a reliable
process for communication
with this other world
and the beings therein.
>> If we are to
look to the future--
I mean, if we--
I can imagine a
society where the idea
of extradimensional
intelligence is accepted,
a society where it
is normal for someone
to enter a psychedelic state
and to receive information
from beings from
another reality.
I mean, this is radical stuff.
For modern, rational
kind of human,
the idea that there are
intelligences beyond
this reality is extraordinary.
It occurred to me that the time
that people spent in this space
was often frustrating.
People would enter
this space and then
they would be dragged
back out, often just
as they had established
some sort of communication.
They said, I have
to go, I have to go,
and they're dragged back,
often against their will,
into the consensus world.
DMT has a number of
properties, a number
of its unique properties,
that are not shared
by other classic psychedelics.
Now, the main one, the
characteristic feature of DMT,
is it's very short-acting.
The second feature is this
lack of subjective tolerance.
So you can inject
someone with DMT.
This is something
Rick Strassman did.
he showed that you
inject someone with DMT,
let them have the experience and
come down, and then inject them
again maybe 30 minutes later.
And you can do that
repeatedly and the experience
reaches the same
level every time.
So these two qualities, this
very rapid but short-acting
effect and the
lack of tolerance,
means that DMT is amenable
to a continuous infusion.
This would allow you to induce
someone into the DMT state
and hold them there not
just for a few minutes,
but perhaps for a few hours.
>> Though the idea of keeping
people in an extended DMT state
is new in this manner, longer
DMT trips have been going
on for thousands of years in
the Amazon with the admixture
of the banisteriopsis
caapi vine.
In the ayahuasca
brew, the DMT state
lasts roughly four to six hours.
Most people's first impression
of the extended state DMT
journey is that it should be
no different than an ayahuasca
journey.
>> Yeah.
But at the same time on
ayahuasca, if it goes on
you can work with it.
And with DMT,
you're down and you
aren't able to work with it.
And so that's one of the
advantages of an extended state
is it might allow more
psychological work than occurs
with just peak up and down.
>> There is interest in that
state and it will turn out
to be an interesting
state, no matter what.
>> If the interest in using
this fusion of technology
and biology is directed at
understanding the world it
sends you to and the
beings that reside there,
the question becomes, what truly
are these seemingly intelligent
creatures?
>> I decided to call them beings
just because that was how they
seemed, they were being.
They were apprehensible,
the volunteer
was able to see them
and interact with them.
And like everything
else in this state,
they were made of light,
quite bright light.
And there's an interaction
between the volunteer
and the being.
And the nature of
that interaction
is like any other types of
interactions we encounter--
fear, love, arguing,
bargaining, storytelling.
>> Because this seems to
be uncharted territory
for humanity, the hope is that
explorers of DMT X or extended
state DMT would be able to gain
useful insight from the beings
about how to navigate the
turbulent ecological and social
issues we face.
But what are the
potential dangers?
>> The main danger, I guess,
would be in how people would
manage that kind of experience.
And you would need very
well trained individuals
to enter the space
and stay there.
It's still uncharted
territory, to some extent.
Having this level
of DMT in the brain
over a long period of
time, we don't know what
the effects are going to be.
We don't know what the effect
on an individual's psychology
is going to be,
how they're going
to manage that experience.
>> It's fascinating to entertain
the thought of what the future
of technology might bring us.
However, some
caution that in order
to responsibly move
into the future
to create a
psychedelic society, we
must honor sustainable
practices and truly
listen to the messages that
we receive from the plants
themselves in order
to move deeper
into the ever evolving world.
>> We live in a very
interesting time.
This is probably
the first time when
almost the entire human
population of the Earth
has the opportunity to
communicate and interact
with one another, whether
it's through travel
or whether it's
through the mass media.
We're aware that we're part
of a large human family,
and it's a troubled human
family, full of pain
and full of anger and hatred
and war is a prevalent feature
in the world today.
It's our state of consciousness
as the human race as a whole
that is the problem here.
I mean, this is a
really messed up state
of consciousness, the global
state of consciousness.
And we need
consciousness change.
That's where the
work has to be done,
at the level of consciousness.
Nature has provided
us with the vehicles
to change our
consciousness, to make
that shift into a sustainable
world where we act with love,
rather than with hate; where
we act with trust, rather
than with suspicion; where
we want to make things grow,
rather than to destroy them.
A shift of
consciousness is needed,
and I believe strongly
that the psychedelics can
play a key role in that, just
as they took our ancestors out
of a state of sleep
40,000 years ago.
It does alter your
thinking about everything
that you look at, and that's
precisely what's needed now.
That's precisely
what's needed now.
We need desperately a
change of consciousness
as the human species if
we are to have any future.
>> Whatever the
future may bring,
however it may transform the
face of religion, pharmacology,
architecture,
technology, and more,
perhaps the main importance of
all of our advancements is that
we move forward as a team, that
we acknowledge we are a species
made of many desires,
fears, values,
and ways of moving
along the path of life.
The idea of a
psychedelic-friendly society
is not to encourage more
use of this peculiar variety
of plants, but to
encourage those
who intend to use them
anyway to do so responsibly.
And for those with concern
for the future of our species,
may we come to understand or
truest connection with nature
and use the tools we have
to truly know ourselves,
realize our potential, and
guide one another to a brighter
future here on Earth.
Up next, join us as we explore
the ancestral and modern use
of sonic in musical tools to
reach psychedelic-type states
of consciousness.